Let's start with basics. How can memory be created? How does a machine essentially remember? This is a question that had intrigued the engineers even before digital technology became a thing. As a result of this curiosity, came the Ratchets, springs,espcapements and a whole other bunch of stuff that simulated memory in mechanical systems.
Then during the 1910's when Telephones were on the rise and relay logic was being extensively studied, coils were charged and discharged to simulate memory. If you would remember, from our previous studies, we have seen that many components even from combinational circuits were prepared basing on this technology of telephones.
In the 1940's when Vacuum tubes came into the picture, cross coupling as a technique was used to construct something which can be termed as a direct ancestor of our modern day sequential circuits. The 1950's eventually saw the formal uprising of SR latches. So let's study latches in somewhat detail.
A latch (as its name goes) does not essentially store any information but repeatedly shouts it. You can imagine that a young child when sent to the market by his mother to fetch a certain set of goods, doesn't remember the list (he possibly can't or doesn't bother to) but repeatedly mumbles it to himself until he reaches the shop and speaks it for the final time infront of the shopkeeper. This is what even a latch does. Once a certain bit is inserted into the latch, the latch continually loops it within itself until it's value is again changed by some external input. This looping of the value is achieved by cross coupling.
Let's now discuss a specific type of latch, the SR latch.
Here we have two inputs S and R. The S input is attached to a NOR gate (say NOR1) and the output of NOR1 is attached to Q which is the supposed output. Another NOR gate(say NOR2) takes R as an input and Q' as it's output. Now NOR1 takes Q as it's second input and NOR2 takes Q' as it's second input. So essentially we are forming a feedback loop (the output feeds again into the input) but each output feeds the input of the other. This is what we call cross coupling. Now depending upon the physical gate delays, Q and Q' take up some intial values ( either 01 or 10, both of which are stable) when the circuit is turned on. 
If S=0 and R=0
The circuits holds on to it's values
If S=0 and R=1
The circuit sets Q=0 and Q'=1
If S=1 and R=0
The circuit sets Q=1 and Q'=0
If S=1 and R=1
The circuit enters an unpredictable state.
This is because when S=1 the output Q gets set to 1 and when R=1 the output Q' gets set to 1. However when both S and R become 1 then the latch gets confused and takes up a random state. This is referred to as a race condition and it is undesirable in actual circuits due to it's unpredictability. This happens to be a downside of the SR latch.

Okay, so now we are ready with our SR latch and we have implemented our first memory element. However the immediate question that we are met with is that whether or not this circuit is compatible in an actual system. The answer to it is no. We already know that an SR latch takes two inputs S and R (which might be some wires in the greater circuit) which most probably serve more than just a single purpose in the system.What I mean to say is that it is highly unprobable that the circuit designer makes the wires for S and R only for feeding into the SR latch. In actual circuits, the wires that provide the S and R inputs might be used to carry different bits at different instances of time. However this very fact poses a problem. As soon as the wires start carrying some different bits, the value stored inside the SR latch gets tampered with. So we need some mechanism by which we can cut off the SR latch from the rest of the circuit and reattach it again as per our need. This introduces us to the gated SR latch. Here we connect the S and R input wires to two separate AND gates. The common input for these two AND gates is an Enable signal(denoted by E). Now S and R can function only when E is turned on. If E is set to 0, irrespective of the values of S and R, the inputs to the cross coupled NOR gates of the original circuit of S and R would be 0 and the previous outputs would be held. Though gated latches also aren't used as such in the circuits. However this is an important step for understanding the relevance of clock when we start building flip flops.

Now that we have resolved the first problem, let's return to the nail that closed the coffin on our SR latch, yes, I am talking about the the s=1, r=1 race condition. A race condition in an actual circuit can be a source of havoc. This is because we cannot predict the output after a race condition. This can cause a latch to be rendered useless (at least till the time we don't restart the circuit) if it enters a metastable state or store some value we didn't intend it to. This seems a very small problem when seen in isolation. However on a large scale when multiple memory elements are chained together, this can become the cause of serious trouble. So we need to introduce some mechanism by which s and r can never become 1 together. A little bit of thought allows us to identify that this problem can be solved if we never let s and r share the same values. This can be achieved if we pass in a single input say(D) and then pass D to s and the inverted value of D to r. Now some of you might question that how will then the circuit retain memory? What about s=0 and r=0? The answer is given by the fact that we still have the enable button. If we turn it off we can simulate the situation of retention of memory. This, ladies and gentlemen, is the D latch.

So finally we have constructed the most basic logic elements, the latches. However we still have a bottleneck, the enable button. The enable button is something that either needs to be toggled manually or by some extravagant circuital arrangement. This sabotages us when we have to make an efficient processor performing millions of computations per second simulatenously in a synchronous manner. So what we need is a central system that guides all the memory elements to either store or release their memories (as per the need). This is just like how a hundreds of military personnels execute a single action upon the call from a parade commander. This is where the clock enters the picture and we transition to flip flops (the basic unit of memory in digital circuits).

Ok so now that we are aware about the fundamental need that gave rise to flipflops let's probe into the subject further. Much like latches we did end up creating SR flipflops (again with the same shortcoming of race conditions) and thereafter JK flipflops. We also did have T flipflops but the most prominent flipflop that we use today is the D flipflop. In the historical context, flipflops became prmoinent during the 1960's to 1970's. A D flipflop essentially works just like a D latch but the enable button is replaced with the clock. The outputs are stored only at the moment when clock switches from 0 to 1(rising edge) or 1 to 0(falling edge). In this project we have implemented a rising edge based flipflop. However later when we would assemble the entire processor, we shall also make use of falling edge flipflops for the purpose of pipelining(something we will see later).

Now unlike the previous chapters where I congratulated you after the end of the section, this time allow me to send the greetings beforehand. You might not know but in these few chapters you have traversed across almost a century of innovations. We started with George Boole's Boolean algebra and the diodes and now we have created a one bit memory that can directly be integrated into the system. The portions after this are more about putting stuff together and calibrating them to function harmoniously than about designing stuff from scratch. Hereafter we might use a lot of new terminologies that are daunting for any standard student. However since we are engineering each component and handcrafting the processor chip, our understanding would be more intuitive. So fasten your seatbelts and zoom along two more innovations in this chapter before we go towards some serious deals.

After having created a single bit memory, it is only natural to think about combining these single bits to create larger memories. Surprisingly that is what we do. The combination of these 1 bit memories(flipflops) is what we call the registers. Registers are the operational yet fundamental memory units inside the CPU. For our CPU which has a 64 bit system, each register will naturally be 64 bit. Now there are a variety of architectures around these registers but the primary ones are SISO(Serial In and Serial Out) and PIPO(Parallel In and Parallel Out). Both of them accomplish the same goal but have different pros and cons. The SISO architecture is extremely hardware efficient(uses a single wire) but just loading or extracting a 64 bit value from such a register will take 64 clock cycles(that is exorbitantly inefficient). On the other hand PIPO requires a lot more wiring but extraction and loading are both single cycle processes thus optimizing the processor's performance. In the present times hardware costs have reduced significantly and buyers across categories are willing to pay higher for a faster and smoother experience. Hence PIPO architecture is the go to choice in modern day processors. Besides since our processor is virtual, we don't have to give a damn about wire costs. So let's build it up

Whooooof, that was the last nail on the coffin before we start handling more abstract stuff. The last component that we wish to create is the program counter.A program counter is also a register but it has a specific role inside the processor. As it's name suggests, the role of a program counter is maintain the proper flow of instructions inside the CPU. The job of the program counter is to store the address(from the main memory or you may say RAM for now) of the next instruction to be executed. Once the current instruction is executed, the program counter sends its contents(that is the address of the next instruction) to the rest of the control unit and stores within it the address of the next instruction. So let's build it.