Hey Reader,
Too good to see you this far!! First of all pat yourself on the back. No, seriously, do it. You still didn't, I am watching you(Do it!!!). You deserve a short victory lap because we have finally come to the seuqential circuits.
It's marvellous that just few directories ago we had been dealing with wires and now we have synthesized quite a few components. That's some real life hardware geek level stuff. Isn't it incredible to think that if only we are supplied with the necessary physical components,we can actually handcraft all these components ourselves(though that would have a few more domain specific nuances).
So lemme give you a sneakpeak into our project's current status. If you ever studied computers in your school or looked up computers on the interent then you would know that, functionally, a processor is divided into three major units, the ALU(the heavylifter), CU(the wise bud) and MU(the memory expert). Essentially you can imagine a processor not as a junky combination of hardware driven by the principles of physics (an idea that makes a non-techie deliruos) but as a room which has three friends frantically working at the user's command.
The Memory Unit(MU) is a memory expert which memorizes the instructions of the user as soon as the user provides them. The MU forwards this to the Control Unit(CU) who is a wise guy and clearly comprehends the instruction. Upon comprehension the CU instructs the Arithmetic and Logic Unit(ALU) who is the actual heavylifter, to execute the task. Any device no matter how advanced (an IBM PC AT from the days of yore or a modern day Macbook Pro) essentially involves engineering these three friends and to make them work harmoniously.Additionally we might provide the user with some user friendly interface to instruct the processor, but that's something that the software guys deal with. For now let's focus on the hardware.
So, having updated your knowledge base, let me make some fascinating revelations. Out of these three friends we have already engineered almost 90% of the ALU. The components that we defined in the combinational circuits portion when combined together constitute the ALU. There are a few other components here and there but we would make them as well.Additionally, by the time we get done with sequential circuits, we would be almost ready with the MU and CU as well. After that all that we would be doing is to wire them together and make them work harmoniously.

Now before we jump int the specific components, let's try and understand the need for sequential circuits intuitively. Till now our processor can make basic calculations and logic operations. If you remember the words of George Boole, you would know that any thought can be presented as a combination of true and false statements (in our case true=1, false=0). Now we have solved one aspect of the problem, we have created the whisker to mix the dough. Simply speaking we have created the means by which we can combine 0's and 1's but just like whiskers can only mix the dough and you still need a vessel to store the dough,while whisking, while baking and even while serving, similarly we need some tools to store these 0's and 1's. It's essentially like asking that the 0's and 1's that are to be combined (by the combinational circuits); where would they come from and where would they go to? 
In response to this we create for the first time in history, circuits with memory. If you are into PC building or just have gamer friends then you might have heard them geek about RAM's and SSD's. Though these are not sequential circuits and rather involve certain other technologies to store information in large and relatively less volatile or non volatile patterns, still one can look at them to appreciate the need for memory. Now we create somewhat like a local memory for the processor. RAM's and SSD's are like the books in my study shelf and the books in the state library, respectively, which although containing information are not at my immediate disposal. However the memory within sequential circuits is like the information that is currently in my head and I can invoke it in less than the time it requires to snap a finger. Here our priority is quick access and to achieve this we trade it off with monetary cost and size. The specific implementational details, we shall observe in the other sections of this chapter. Till then, happy reading....